[Blog] Encoder Disaggregation for Scalable Multimodal Model Serving (#135)
vllm-project/vllm-project.github.io: _posts/2025-12-15-vllm-epd.md

</p>

<p align="center">
<img src="/assets/figures/2025-12-15-epd/npu_plot_len2000_epd_vs_non_epd.png" alt="NPU Long-Text Workloads Performance" width="100%">
</p>

Across all Ascend experiments, EPD exhibits the **same hardware‑agnostic benefits**:

- Consistently higher throughput (5–20% across stable regions).  
- Significant reductions in P99 TTFT and P99 TPOT.  
- Delayed congestion points and tighter tail‑latency profiles.  

This confirms that EPD’s gains stem from architectural decoupling—not hardware idiosyncrasies—making it portable across GPU and NPU platforms.

---

## Conclusion

Through careful analysis of LMM inference behavior and production workload demands, we developed a **decoupled, pipeline‑parallel multimodal serving architecture** that:

- reduces TTFT and TPOT,  
- improves throughput and stability,  
- eliminates cross‑modal interference, and  
- enables efficient, scalable, multimodal serving.

This architecture provides a practical blueprint for next‑generation high‑performance LMM serving systems.

---

## Related Work

### ViT DP + LM TP

> Before exploring encoder disaggregation, vLLM first introduced a hybrid parallelism strategy for multimodal models on a single node: the [ViT Data Parallel + LLM Tensor Parallel](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/issues/22743) approach, where the vision encoder runs with data parallelism across GPUs while the language model uses tensor parallelism. This hybrid strategy dramatically reduces TTFT and improves overall throughput. The approach has since been proven effectness and adopted by other serving frameworks, such as [SGLang](https://github.com/sgl-project/sglang/pull/13126).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before exploring encoder disaggregation, vLLM first introduced a hybrid parallelism strategy for multimodal models on a single node: the [ViT Data Parallel + LLM Tensor Parallel](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/issues/22743) approach, where the vision encoder runs with data parallelism across GPUs while the language model uses tensor parallelism. This hybrid strategy dramatically reduces TTFT and improves overall throughput. The approach has since been proven effectiveness and adopted by other serving frameworks, such as [SGLang](https://github.com/sgl-project/sglang/pull/13126).
```

---
layout: post
title: "Encoder Disaggregation for Scalable Multimodal Model Serving"

> author: "ZHENG Chenguang, Nguyen Kha Nhat Long, Tai Ho Chiu Hero, Le Manh Khuong"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
author: "ZHENG Chenguang, Nguyen Kha Nhat Long, Tai Ho Chiu Hero, Le Manh Khuong, Wu Haiyan, Wu Hang"
```
换成这个吧

5. **PD execution**  
   - PD instance loads MM embeddings from remote storage using EC connectors.  
   - Executes prefill and decode normally, injecting embeddings directly into the model runner cache.

---

## Implementation

### Core Components

#### 1. ECConnectorRole
Defines where the connector instance runs:

```
class ECConnectorRole(enum.Enum):
    SCHEDULER = 0   # in scheduler process
    WORKER = 1      # in worker process
```

#### 2. ECConnectorMetadata
Abstract synchronization/state object shared between scheduler-side and worker-side connectors:

```
class ECConnectorMetadata(ABC):
    pass
```

#### 3. ECConnectorBase
Abstract interface for all connectors.

Key fields:
- `role`: scheduler or worker  
- `config`: connector-specific config  
- `metadata`: ECConnectorMetadata

Key methods:
- `has_caches(request)`: check if remote embeddings already exist  
- `build_connector_meta(sched_output)`: determine which caches workers must load  
- `update_state_after_alloc(request, item)`: update cache allocation based on cache hit/miss  
- `save_caches(encoder_cache)`: push encoder outputs to remote storage  

> - `start_load_caches(metadata)`: load caches on the PD side before prefill/decoder execution

Reviewer 3: nit: prefill/decode

- Consistently higher throughput (5–20% across stable regions).  
- Significant reductions in P99 TTFT and P99 TPOT.  
- Delayed congestion points and tighter tail‑latency profiles.  

This confirms that EPD’s gains stem from architectural decoupling—not hardware idiosyncrasies—making it portable across GPU and NPU platforms.

---

## Conclusion

Through careful analysis of LMM inference behavior and production workload demands, we developed a **decoupled, pipeline‑parallel multimodal serving architecture** that:

- reduces TTFT and TPOT,  
- improves throughput and stability,  
- eliminates cross‑modal interference, and  
- enables efficient, scalable, multimodal serving.

This architecture provides a practical blueprint for next‑generation high‑performance LMM serving systems.

---

## Related Work

### ViT DP + LM TP

Before exploring encoder disaggregation, it's worth noting that **vLLM pioneered the hybrid parallelism strategy for multimodal models on a single node**. The insight is simple but powerful: ViT encoders are small models where tensor parallelism (TP) introduces more overhead than benefit, while LLMs benefit significantly from TP.

> vLLM introduced the [ViT Data Parallel + LLM Tensor Parallel](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/issues/22743) approach, where the vision encoder runs with data parallelism across GPUs while the language model uses tensor parallelism. This hybrid strategy dramatically reduces TTFT and improves overall throughput. The approach has since been adopted by other serving frameworks, including [SGLang](https://github.com/sgl-project/sglang/pull/13126).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before exploring encoder disaggregation, vLLM first introduced a hybrid parallelism strategy for multimodal models on a single node: the [ViT Data Parallel + LLM Tensor Parallel](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/issues/22743) approach, where the vision encoder runs with data parallelism across GPUs while the language model uses tensor parallelism. This hybrid strategy dramatically reduces TTFT and improves overall throughput. The approach has since been proven effectness and adopted by other serving frameworks, such as [SGLang](https://github.com/sgl-project/sglang/pull/13126).
```

### Prior Art and Industry Adoption

> NVIDIA Dynamo has supported EPD-style disaggregation with vLLM internally for some time, though this capability has not yet been released to the open-source community. The vLLM native EPD implementation ([PR #25233](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/25233)) was merged in early November 2025, bringing first-class encoder disaggregation support to the open-source ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NVIDIA Dynamo team has first supported [EPD-style disaggregation](https://github.com/ai-dynamo/dynamo/blob/44a2cba976d12a79b2164ed11612c1bc7491a3d8/examples/backends/vllm/launch/agg_multimodal_epd.sh#L5) with vLLM, though the documentation was limited. The vLLM native EPD implementation ([PR #25233](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/25233)) was merged in early November 2025 and became available since release 0.11.1, bringing first-class encoder disaggregation support to the open-source ecosystem.
```
